rdm: versioning support (#45)
inveniosoftware/rfcs: rfcs/rdm-0045-versioning-support.md

### Exclusion: Version relationships across repositories

You could imagine modelling version relationships across repositories. For instance a dataset is first uploaded to repository X, then later a new version is published in repository Y.

We will not complicate the versioning support with this style of relationships. Relationships across repositories should be modelled in metadata via the related identifiers field. In addition, another workaround is to transfer the full dataset from repository X into repository Y.

## Backend Design

The backend consist of the data access, service and presentation layers.

### Data access layer

#### Version relationships

We propose that the information previously held by Invenio-PIDRelations is moved directly to the record database table. The current attributes of the ``RDMRecordMetadata`` model includes:

- ``id `` - UUID of the record
- ``json`` - Record JSON document
- ``version_id`` - Version counter used for optimistic concurrency control.
- ``created `` - Creation timestamp.
- ``updated`` - Modification timestamp.
- ``bucket_id`` - Foreign key (UUID) to a Files-REST bucket.

We propose to add the following two attributes:

> - ``parent_id`` - Foreign key (UUID) to a Concept Record (a new entity).
> - ``parent_order`` - Integer (4 bytes) defining the order of siblings.
> - ``parent_latest`` - Boolean to indicate if the record is the latest version.

Reviewer: I know commits have already been merged, but here are my takes on the names:

``parent_id`` is both the id of the parent *and* namespacing for the "versioning" features. This makes ``parent_order`` and ``parent_latest`` confusing because ``parent`` there is only for namespacing. How about: 

```suggestion
- ``versioning_parent_id`` / ``versioning_concept_id`` - Foreign key (UUID) to a Concept Record (a new entity).
- ``versioning_order`` - Integer (4 bytes) defining the rank of the record among sibling versions.
- ``versioning_latest`` - Boolean to indicate if the record is the latest version.
```

The name ``parent`` could alternatively be ``concept``, but we would like to avoid naming that conflicts with the ``version_id``. Technically ``version_id`` is the **revision identifier** however, due to history reasons and API this is not an easy rename to perform.

In addition a database index should be defined to allow for easily querying all records related to a concept record in the correct order (thus likely a combined index on ``parent_id`` and ``parent_order``):

```SQL
SELECT * FROM rdm_records_metadata WHERE parent_id=... ORDER BY parent_order
```

#### Concept Record

> We also propose to add a new entity, a ``ConceptRecord``, which represents the concept record and are able to hold properties for all records such as ownership and permissions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also propose to add a new entity, a ``ConceptRecord``, which represents the concept record and is able to hold properties for all records such as ownership and permissions.
```

The model (table name ``rdm_records_concept``) would be like a usual record with the following database columns:

- ``id `` - UUID of the concept record
- ``json`` - Record JSON document
- ``version_id`` - Version counter used for optimistic concurrency control.
- ``created `` - Creation timestamp.
- ``updated`` - Modification timestamp.

The concept record would hold JSON documents similar to below:

```json
{
    "id": "1234-abcde",
    "pid": {
        ...
    },
    "access": {
        "owned_by": [{"user": 1}],
        "grants: [
            ...
        ]
    },
}
```

Essentially the concept persistent identifier, the access ownership and access grants would be moved from the existing record to the new concept record.

**Why a new entity?**

The new model allows keeping the ownership and permissions separate from the single version records. Alternatively, we would have to duplicate (and update) access information in multiple specific version records.

> Also, having just a single concept record for both records and drafts, means that access information can be updated not only from the deposit form, but also e.g. share button on the landing page record.

Reviewer: (it's really the fact that drafts and recors share the same recid that makes it easy to have share button on each :wink: ). Having a single concept record for both record and drafts is "natural":

```
Concept Record
|
|___ Record V2
|___ Record V1 ------ Draft V1
|___ Record V0 
```

In addition, it opens future use cases where we may want to associate more data with the concept record. On possible upcoming use case involves storing shared links with the record.

We will also know exactly when we have to reindex siblings and when it's not needed.

**Why not in the JSON?**

> An alternative is to store the ``parent_id`` and ``parent_order`` in the record instead of at the database table, however would like to have the database-level constraints enforced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An alternative is to store the ``parent_id`` and ``parent_order`` in the record instead of at the database table, however we would like to have the database-level constraints enforced and take advantage of indexing on these fields.
```

**SQLAlchemy-Continuum revisions**

The Concept Record should not have the SQLAlchemy-Continuum revision system enabled, as any change to the access would create a new revision. While, we may want to log changes to the access control, we prefer to have a specific audit logging module for this purpose.

#### Record API

The record API should be extended with

**Accessing the concept**

```python
{
    "concept": {
        "id": "<uuid>",
        "access": {
            "owned_by
        }
    },

> }

Reviewer: So we don't try to hide the technical level implementation at the API level (i.e. put all access in same place and keep `conceptid` as before)?  We should perhaps then be explicit:

```suggestion
}

The `conceptid` field is removed from the API in favour of the above.
```

```

#### Indexing of concept records

We will not index concept records.

#### Use Case: GitHub Integration (system process)

#### Reindexing / denormalization

- Reindex siblings.

### Service layer

#### Create a new record

```python
service.create(id_, identity, data, links_config=...)
```

#### Read a record

```python
service.read(id_, identity, data, links_config=...)
service.read_draft(id_, identity, data, links_config=...)
```

#### Edit a record

```python
service.edit(id_, identity, data, links_config=...)
```

#### Create a new version

```python
service.new_version(id_, identity, data, links_config=...)
```

> #### Updating a draft

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Update a draft

service.update_draft(id_, identity, data. links_config=...)
```

The update of a draft is unchanged, except that you can no longer change the ownership and permissions via the draft (which anyway was not possible in the February release).

**Visibility and embargo information**

> Specifically, you will still update the record/files restrictions and embargo date/reason via the is method. The only difference is that it requires manage permissions to change this information, where as the metadata can be changed with edit permission.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specifically, you will still update the record/files restrictions and embargo date/reason via this method (granted you have the `can_edit` permission). 
```

#### Updating ownership and permissions

> We propose adding a new method specifically update the permissions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We propose adding a new method to specifically update the ownership and permissions:
```

```python
service.update_permissions(id_, identity, data, links_config=...)
service.update_owners(id_, identity, data, links_config=...)
```

> 

Reviewer: Move the bit above here:

```suggestion
This method requires `can_manage` permission to change this information.
```

- Resolve the id
    - Should transparently handle the concept pid / pid issue (explicit - always use concept - not logical for APIs)
- Check revision id
- Check permissions
- Load the data
- Run components
- Commit concept record
- Index
    - Reindex all records and drafts (bulk index)

#### Search versions

```python
service.search_versions()
```

#### Reading a record/draft (dereferencing)

(not needed? managed through record service)

#### The service schema

- A new schema for dumping permissions.

### Presentation layer

#### REST API

The existing REST API, already define endpoints for the main operations discussed in the service:

- ``GET /records`` - Search records.
- ``GET /user/records`` - Search drafts.
- ``POST /records`` - Create a new draft.
- ``POST /records/:id/draft`` - Edit a record.
- ``PUT /records/:id/draft`` - Update draft.
- ``POST /records/:id/actions/publish`` - Publish a record.

> - ``GET /record/:id/versions`` - Search versions for a record.
> - ``POST /record/:id/versions`` - Create a new version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``GET /records/:id/versions`` - Search versions for a record.
- ``POST /records/:id/versions`` - Create a new version.
```
right?

> We will add a new endpoint for updating the permissions:
> 
> - ``PUT /records/:id/access`` - Update permissions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will add new endpoints:

- ``PUT /records/:id/access`` - Update permissions.
- ``GET /records/:id/versions/latest - Get the latest version
```

according to `links` below.

We use ``PUT`` instead of e.g. ``PATCH /records/:id`` because we want to make use of the concept records version counter in the ETag for optimistic concurrency control, and we want to model the endpoint as a new REST resource. Some notes:

> - Identifier: We're using the ``:id`` of single version records instead of the concept record. This is to make it easier for API developers to deal only with a single identifier for a version, and to not confusing by using a different id.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Identifier: We're using the ``:id`` of single version records instead of the concept record. This is to make it easier for API developers: they only have to deal with a single identifier (the one for a record version), they don't have to make an additional API call, and they don't need to track another identifier.
```

- Resource: We model an "access resource" instead of a "concept record resource" to make it easy to use and understand for API developers, and because different parts of the concept record may have different permissions as well as service methods.

**Record/Draft Serialization**

Both record and drafts serializations should include a link to the access resource if the user has manage permission:

```json
{
    "id": "...",
    "links": {
        "access": "https://localhost:5000/api/records/:id/access",
        "latest": "https://localhost:5000/api/records/:id/versions/latest/",
        "latest_html": "https://localhost:5000/records/:id/latest/",
    }
}
```

**Access Serialization**

The access serialization

```json
{
    "id": "...",
    "access": {
        "owned_by": []
        "grants": []
    }
    "links": {
        "access": "https://localhost:5000/api/records/:id/access"

>     }

Reviewer: this is itself right? Are we returning self-referential links for the files metadata endpoint? This is the endpoint that is the most similar. For records we call these links `self`, but is this really needed in this case...?

}
```

## Frontend design

#### Redirect endpoint

In order make getting to the latest version easier and not make expensive queries when rendering the landing page, we suggest adding a UI endpoint, ``/records/:id/latest/`` which redirects to the latest version of a record.

```
HTTP/1.1 302 Found

Location: /records/:id
```

#### Landing page

The record landing page should add the following elements:

- Newer version alert
- Previous versions
- Manage section:
    - A "New version" button.

**Newer version alert**

A record that has a newer version should clear display a warning message (same as on Zenodo), with a link to the new version.

> The condition for the new version is essentially: ``record.parent_latest is False``.

Reviewer: :+1:

**Previous versions**

The list of previous versions can be quite expensive to compute and requires information from each of the records (e.g. title/version string/DOI). We suggest adding a small React-Searckit application that calls the ``/api/records/:id/versions`` endpoint.

The request should include the following parameters:

- ``size=5`` - To show the latest 5 versions.
- ``sort=version`` - To sort by the version order.

The result item rendering should:

- Clear mark the currently displayed version. If the currently displayed version is not in the top 5 results, then it should be added to the end of the list. See Zenodo behaviour for this.
- Link to a page where all versions can be searched ("View all X versions")

**Manage section**

The landing page should in the manage section display a "New version" button if the use has manage permission.

#### Search/List uploads

The two search pages needs to add the following:

**Version facet**

A flip-switch which essentially

- Version facet (flip switch): ``?versions=all|latest``
- Sort by version number
- Filter by parent version
- Result item: display link to concept landing page

> ## Plan

Reviewer: assuming from here on out it's just scratch pad.
